.\" (c) Copyright 2022 Richard W. Marinelli
.\"
.\" This work is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPLv3).  To view a copy of this license, see the
.\" "License.txt" file included with this distribution or visit http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html.
.\"
.ad l
.TH XRE 3 2022-08-18 "Ver. 1.2" "XRE Library Documentation"
.nh \" Turn off hyphenation.
.SH NAME
\fBXRE\fR - eXtended Regular Expression library.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B (POSIX-ERE-compliant APIs)
.PP
\fB#include "regex.h"\fR
.PP
.B (Non-portable XRE equivalent of POSIX-ERE-compliant APIs)
.PP
\fB#include "xre.h"\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBXRE\fR library is a package of routines that process IEEE Std 1003.1-2017 (POSIX) regular expressions
(REs) with enhancements, as described in xre_format(7).  The routines conform to the POSIX standard in every
respect, except for the following:
.RS 5
.IP \fB\-\fR 2
Basic Regular Expressions (BREs), which are obsolete, are not supported.
.sp -1
.IP \fB\-\fR 2
Extended Regular Expressions (EREs), which are the modern replacement for BREs, are the default.
.RE
.PP
The library\(aqs API consists of several functions.  The preferred routines are those with names beginning with
"x".  The ones beginning with "reg" are provided for compatibility with existing code and for POSIX
compliance; however, to take full advantage of the XRE library, the "xre.h" header and "x" versions of the
functions should be used.
.SS Overview
The core library routines compile an RE string pattern into an internal form, match the internal form against
a string, and report results.  There are also routines which convert error codes from the compilation and
execution functions to a message string, and a routine which releases all dynamic memory associated with the
internal form of an RE.
.PP
The library contains numerous extensions to POSIX EREs, including an enhanced mode which greatly expands the
regular expression syntax and matching capabilities (see xre_format(7)).  Additionally, the library supports
fixed length patterns and strings (which may contain null characters), wide and multibyte characters in
patterns and strings, user-defined strings, approximate ("fuzzy") matching, and backward matching.  Extensions
are enabled by specifying flags at compilation time, using special syntax in the pattern, and/or calling the
appropriate routines for the desired features.
.PP
Note that a program using functions in the XRE library must be linked with the -lxre option.
.SS Routine Name Index
The following table lists all XRE routines in alphabetical order and a brief description of each.
.sp
.PD 0
.RS 4
.IP regcomp 16
Compile a POSIX-compliant extended regular expression string pattern.
.IP regerror 16
Convert an error code to a message string.
.IP regexec 16
Match a compiled regular expression against a string and reports results.
.IP regfree 16
Release memory associated with a compiled regular expression.
.IP xreconf 16
Obtain library configuration (build) information.
.IP xregaexec 16
Perform approximate matching of a compiled regular expression against a string and reports results.
.IP xregainit 16
Initialize approximate-matching parameters with preset values.
.IP xreganexec 16
Perform approximate matching of a compiled regular expression against a fixed-length string and reports results.
.IP xregauexec 16
Perform approximate matching of a compiled regular expression against user-defined data and reports results.
.IP xregawexec 16
Perform approximate matching of a compiled regular expression against a wide-character string and reports results.
.IP xregawnexec 16
Perform approximate matching of a compiled regular expression against a wide-character, fixed-length string and reports results.
.IP xregcomp 16
Compile an extended regular expression string pattern.
.IP xregerror 16
Convert an error code to a message string.
.IP xregexec 16
Match a compiled regular expression against a string and reports results.
.IP xregfree 16
Release memory associated with a compiled regular expression.
.IP xregmsg 16
Convert an error code to a message string.
.IP xregncomp 16
Compile a fixed-length extended regular expression string pattern.
.IP xregnexec 16
Match a compiled regular expression against a fixed-length string and reports results.
.IP xreguexec 16
Match a compiled regular expression against user-defined data and reports results.
.IP xregwcomp 16
Compile a wide-character extended regular expression string pattern.
.IP xregwexec 16
Match a compiled regular expression against a wide-character string and reports results.
.IP xregwncomp 16
Compile a wide-character, fixed-length extended regular expression string pattern.
.IP xregwnexec 16
Match a compiled regular expression against a wide-character, fixed-length string and reports results.
.IP xrevers 16
Obtain XRE library version information.
.RE
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
xreconf(3), xregaex(3), xregex(3)
.PP
Specific function names (like \fBxregcomp\fR) for detailed routine descriptions.
