.\" (c) Copyright 2022 Richard W. Marinelli
.\"
.\" This work is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPLv3).  To view a copy of this license, see the
.\" "License.txt" file included with this distribution or visit http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html.
.\"
.ad l
.TH XRE_FORMAT 7 2022-08-18 "Ver. 1.2" "XRE Library Documentation"
.nh \" Turn off hyphenation.
.SH NAME
\fBxre_format\fR - POSIX 1003.1-2017 extended regular expressions for use with the XRE library.
.SH DESCRIPTION
IEEE Std 1003.1-2017 (POSIX) regular expressions (REs) come in two forms: Basic Regular Expressions (BREs),
and modern or Extended Regular Expressions (EREs).  BREs, which are obsolete, are not supported by the XRE
library, and are not discussed here.  This page describes EREs, which are the default form in the library, as
well as enhanced forms, which provide for several advanced features and capabilities.
.SS Definitions
An ERE is one or more non-empty \fIbranches\fR, separated by \(aq|\(aq.  It matches anything that one of the
branches matches.
.PP
A branch is one or more \fIpieces\fR, concatenated.  It matches a match for the first, followed by a match for
the second, and so on.
.PP
A piece is an \fIatom\fR, possibly followed by a single \(aq*\(aq, \(aq+\(aq, \(aq?\(aq, or \fIbrace\fR
\fIexpression\fR.  An atom followed by \(aq*\(aq matches a sequence of 0 or more matches of the atom.  An atom
followed by \(aq+\(aq matches a sequence of 1 or more matches of the atom.  An atom followed by \(aq?\(aq
matches a sequence of 0 or 1 matches of the atom.
.PP
A brace expression is \(aq{\(aq, followed by a \fIbound\fR, followed by \(aq}\(aq.
.PP
A bound is an unsigned decimal integer, possibly followed by \(aq,\(aq, possibly followed by another unsigned
decimal integer.  The integers must lie between 0 and RE_DUP_MAX (255) inclusive, and if there are two of
them, the first may not exceed the second.  An atom followed by a brace expression containing a bound with one
integer \fIi\fR and no comma matches a sequence of exactly \fIi\fR matches of the atom.  An atom followed by a
brace expression containing a bound with one integer \fIi\fR and a comma matches a sequence of \fIi\fR or more
matches of the atom.  An atom followed by a brace expression containing a bound with two integers \fIi\fR and
\fIj\fR matches a sequence of \fIi\fR through \fIj\fR (inclusive) matches of the atom.
.PP
An atom is a regular expression enclosed in \(aq()\(aq (matching a match for the regular expression), an empty set
of \(aq()\(aq (matching a null string), a \fIbracket\fR \fIexpression\fR (see below), \(aq.\(aq (matching any single
character), \(aq^\(aq (matching the null string at the beginning of a string), \(aq$\(aq (matching the null string at the
end of a string), a \(aq\e\(aq followed by one of the characters \(aq^$.[]()|*+?{}\e\(aq (matching that character taken as
an ordinary character), a \(aq\e\(aq followed by any other character (matching that character taken as an ordinary
character, as if the \(aq\e\(aq had not been present), or a single character with no other significance (matching
that character).  It is illegal to end an ERE with \(aq\e\(aq.
.PP
A \fIbracket\fR \fIexpression\fR is a list of characters enclosed in \(aq[]\(aq.  It normally matches any single
character from the list (but see below).  If the list begins with \(aq^\(aq, it matches any single character (but
see below) \fInot\fR from the rest of the list.  If two characters in the list are separated by \(aq-\(aq, this is
shorthand for the full \fIrange\fR of characters between those two (inclusive) in the collating sequence;
e.g., \(aq[0-9]\(aq in ASCII matches any decimal digit.  It is illegal for two ranges to share an endpoint; e.g.,
\(aqa-c-e\(aq.
.PP
To include a literal \(aq]\(aq in the list, make it the first character (following a possible \(aq^\(aq).  To include a
literal \(aq-\(aq, make it the first or last character, or the second endpoint of a range.  To use a literal \(aq-\(aq as
the first endpoint of a range, enclose it in \(aq[.\(aq and \(aq.]\(aq to make it a collating element (see below).  With
the exception of these and some combinations beginning with \(aq[\(aq (see next paragraphs), all other special
characters, including \(aq\e\(aq, lose their special significance within a bracket expression.
.PP
Within a bracket expression, a collating element (a character, a multi-character sequence that collates as if
it were a single character, or a collating-sequence name for either) enclosed in \(aq[.\(aq and \(aq.]\(aq stands for the
sequence of characters of that collating element.  The sequence is a single element of the bracket
expression\(aqs list.  A bracket expression containing a multi-character collating element can thus match more
than one character; e.g., if the collating sequence includes a \(aqch\(aq collating element, then the ERE
\(aq[[.ch.]]*c\(aq matches the first five characters of \(aqchchcc\(aq.
.PP
Within a bracket expression, a collating element enclosed in \(aq[=\(aq and \(aq=]\(aq is an equivalence
class, standing for the sequences of characters of all collating elements equivalent to that one, including
itself.  (If there are no other equivalent collating elements, the treatment is as if the enclosing delimiters
were \(aq[.\(aq and \(aq.]\(aq.)  For example, if \(aqx\(aq and \(aqy\(aq are the members of an equivalence
class, then \(aq[[=x=]]\(aq, \(aq[[=y=]]\(aq, and \(aq[xy]\(aq are all synonymous.  An equivalence class may
not be an endpoint of a range.
.PP
Within a bracket expression, the name of a \fIcharacter\fR \fIclass\fR enclosed in \(aq[:\(aq and \(aq:]\(aq
stands for the list of all characters belonging to that class.  Standard character class names are:
.nf
.sp
.PD 0
.sp
.RS 6
.ta 10 20 30
\fIalnum\fR	\fIcntrl\fR	\fIlower\fR	\fIspace\fR
\fIalpha\fR	\fIdigit\fR	\fIprint\fR	\fIupper\fR
\fIblank\fR	\fIgraph\fR	\fIpunct\fR	\fIxdigit\fR
.RE
.PD
.fi
.PP
These stand for the character classes defined in ctype(3).  A locale may provide others.  A character class
may not be used as an endpoint of a range.
.PP
A bracketed expression like \(aq[[:class:]]\(aq can be used to match a single character that belongs to a character
class.  To match any character that does not belong to a specific class, the negation operator of bracket
expressions may be used: \(aq[^[:class:]]\(aq.
.SS General Matching Rules
In the event that an ERE could match more than one substring of a given string, the ERE matches the one
starting earliest in the string.  If the ERE could match more than one substring starting at that point, it
matches the longest.  Subexpressions also match the longest possible substrings, subject to the constraint
that the whole match be as long as possible, with subexpressions starting earlier in the ERE taking priority
over ones starting later.  Note that higher-level subexpressions thus take priority over their lower-level
component subexpressions.
.PP
Match lengths are measured in characters, not collating elements.  A null string is considered longer than no
match at all.  For example, \(aqbb*\(aq matches the three middle characters of \(aqabbbc\(aq, and
\(aq(wee|week)(knights|nights)\(aq matches all ten characters of \(aqweeknights\(aq.  When \(aq(.*).*\(aq is
matched against \(aqabc\(aq, the parenthesized subexpression matches all three characters, and when
\(aq(a*)*\(aq is matched against \(aqbc\(aq, both the whole ERE and the parenthesized subexpression match the
null string.
.PP
If case-insensitive matching is specified, the effect is much as if all case distinctions had vanished from
the alphabet.  When an alphabetic that exists in multiple cases appears as an ordinary character outside a
bracket expression, it is effectively transformed into a bracket expression containing both cases; e.g., \(aqx\(aq
becomes \(aq[xX]\(aq.  When it appears inside a bracket expression, all case counterparts of it are added to the
bracket expression, so that, for example, \(aq[x]\(aq becomes \(aq[xX]\(aq and \(aq[^x]\(aq becomes \(aq[^xX]\(aq.
.PP
No particular limit is imposed on the length of EREs.  Programs intended to be portable should not employ EREs
longer than 256 bytes, as an implementation can refuse to accept such EREs and remain POSIX-compliant.
.SH ENHANCED FEATURES
When the REG_ENHANCED flag is passed to the \fBxregcomp\fR() routine or one of its variants, additional
features are activated.  These additional features are almost always non-compliant with the POSIX standard,
thus they should be used with care in situations which require portability.
.PP
Within a bracket expression, most characters lose their magic.  This also applies to the additional enhanced
features, with the exception of literal sequences and some shortcuts (described below), which \fIare\fR
recognized inside a bracket expression.
.SS Back References
A new type of atom, a back reference \(aq\e\(aq followed by a digit \fIn\fR from 1 through 9 becomes available.  A
back reference matches the same sequence of characters matched by the \fIn\fRth parenthesized subexpression
(numbering subexpressions by the positions of their opening parentheses, left to right), so that, for example,
\(aq([bc])\e1\(aq matches \(aqbb\(aq or \(aqcc\(aq but not \(aqbc\(aq.
.SS Assertions
In addition to \(aq^\(aq and \(aq$\(aq (the assertions that match the null string at the beginning and end of string,
respectively), the following assertions become available:
.IP \e< 6
Matches the null string at the beginning of a word.
.IP \e> 6
Matches the null string at the end of a word.
.IP \eb 6
Matches the null string at a word boundary (either the beginning or end of a word).
.IP \eB 6
Matches the null string where there is no word boundary.  This is the opposite of \(aq\eb\(aq.
.PP
A word is defined as a sequence of word characters which is neither preceded nor followed by word characters.
A word character is an \fIalnum\fR character (as defined by ctype(3)) or an underscore.
.SS Literal Sequences
Literals are normally just ordinary characters that are matched directly.  Under enhanced mode, certain
character sequences are converted to specific literals.  These can be used both inside and outside a bracket
expression.  For example, the ERE \(aq[\en\et\ ]\(aq would match a single newline, tab, or space character.
.IP \ee 6
The "escape" character (ASCII code 27).
.IP \ef 6
The "form feed" character (ASCII code 12).
.IP \en 6
The "newline" character (ASCII code 10).
.IP \er 6
The "carriage return" character (ASCII code 13).
.IP \et 6
The "horizontal tab" character (ASCII code 9).
.PP
Literals can also be specified as hexadecimal values, using either of the following forms:
.IP \e\fBx\fIx...\fR 12
An arbitrary eight-bit value.  The \fIx...\fR sequence represents one or two hexadecimal digits.  (Note: if
\fIx...\fR is less than two hexadecimal digits, and the character following this sequence happens to be a
hexadecimal digit, use the (following) brace form to avoid ambiguity.)
.IP \e\fBx{\fIx...\fR} 12
An arbitrary, up to 32-bit value.  The \fIx...\fR sequence is an arbitrary sequence of one or more hexadecimal
digits that is long enough to represent the necessary value.
.PP
Lastly, literals can also be specified directly, using their wide character values.  Note that when matching a
multibyte character string, the string\(aqs bytes are converted to wide character before comparing.  This means
that a single literal wide character value may match more than one string byte, depending on the locale\(aqs wide
character encoding.
.SS Shortcuts
The following shortcuts can be used to replace more complicated bracket expressions, and can be used outside a
bracket expression.  Additionally, the ones that are lower-case letters (non-negated forms) can be used inside
a bracket expression as well.  For example, the ERE \(aq[\ed\el_]\(aq would match a single digit, lower-case letter,
or underscore.  The ERE \(aq[\eS/]\(aq however, is illegal.
.IP \ea 6
Matches an alphabetic character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:alpha:]]\(aq.
.IP \eA 6
Matches a non-alphabetic character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:alpha:]]\(aq.
.IP \ed 6
Matches a digit character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:digit:]]\(aq.
.IP \eD 6
Matches a non-digit character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:digit:]]\(aq.
.IP \eh 6
Matches a horizontal space character (space or tab).  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:blank:]]\(aq.
.IP \eH 6
Matches a non-horizontal space character (space or tab).  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:blank:]]\(aq.
.IP \el 6
Matches a lower-case letter.  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:lower:]]\(aq.
.IP \eL 6
Matches a non-lower-case letter.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:lower:]]\(aq.
.IP \eN 6
Matches a non-newline character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^\en]\(aq.
.IP \es 6
Matches a space character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:space:]]\(aq.
.IP \eS 6
Matches a non-space character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:space:]]\(aq.
.IP \eu 6
Matches an upper-case letter.  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:upper:]]\(aq.
.IP \eU 6
Matches a non-upper-case letter.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:upper:]]\(aq.
.IP \ew 6
Matches a word character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[[:alnum:]_]\(aq.
.IP \eW 6
Matches a non-word character.  This is equivalent to \(aq[^[:alnum:]_]\(aq.
.SS Inline Literal Mode
A \(aq\eQ\(aq sequence causes literal ("quote") mode to be entered, while \(aq\eE\(aq ends literal mode and
returns to normal regular expression processing.  This is similar to specifying the REG_NOSPEC (or
REG_LITERAL) option to \fBxregcomp\fR(), except that rather than applying to the whole ERE pattern, it only
applies to the portion between the \(aq\eQ\(aq and \(aq\eE\(aq.  Note that it is not possible to have a
\(aq\eE\(aq in the middle of an inline literal range, as that would terminate literal mode prematurely.
.SS Minimal Repetitions
By default, the repetition operators, \(aq*\(aq, \(aq+\(aq, \(aq?\(aq, and \fIbound\fR are \fIgreedy\fR; that
is, they try to match as many times as possible.  In enhanced mode, appending a \(aq?\(aq to a repetition
operator makes it minimal (or \fIungreedy\fR); it tries to match the fewest number of times (including zero
times, as appropriate).
.PP
For example, against the string \(aqaaa\(aq, the ERE \(aqa*\(aq would match the entire string, while
\(aqa*?\(aq would match the null string at the beginning of the string (matches zero times).  Likewise,
against the string \(aqababab\(aq, the ERE \(aq.*b\(aq would also match the entire string, while \(aq.*?b\(aq
would only match the first two characters.
.PP
The \fBxregcomp\fR() flag REG_UNGREEDY (or REG_MINIMAL) will make the regular (greedy) repetition operators
ungreedy by default.  Appending \(aq?\(aq makes them greedy again.
.PP
Note that the minimal repetitions feature is not currently supported in combination with approximate matching;
see \fBAPPROXIMATE MATCHING\fR.
.SS Non-capturing Parenthesized Subexpressions
Normally, the match offsets to parenthesized subexpressions are recorded in the \fIpmatch\fR array (that is,
when REG_NOSUB is not specified and \fInmatch\fR is large enough to encompass the parenthesized subexpression
in question).  In enhanced mode, if the first two characters following a left parenthesis are \(aq?:\(aq,
grouping of the remaining contents is done, but the corresponding offsets are not recorded in the \fIpmatch\fR
array.  For example, against the string \(aqfubar\(aq, the ERE \(aq(fu)(bar)\(aq would have two subexpression
matches in \fIpmatch\fR; the first for \(aqfu\(aq and the second for \(aqbar\(aq.  But with the ERE
\(aq(?:fu)(bar)\(aq, there would only be one subexpression match, that of \(aqbar\(aq.  Furthermore, against
the string \(aqfufubar\(aq, the ERE \(aq(?:fu)*(bar)\(aq would again match the entire string, but only
\(aqbar\(aq would be recorded in \fIpmatch\fR.
.SS Inline Options
Like the inline literal mode mentioned above, other options can be enabled and disabled for part of an ERE.
\(aq(?\fIo...\fR)\(aq will enable the options specified in \fIo...\fR (one or more options characters; see
below), while \(aq(?-\fIo...\fR)\(aq will disable the specified options, and
\(aq(?\fIo1...\fR-\fIo2...\fR)\(aq will enable the first set of options, and disable the second set.
.PP
Additionally, the inline options syntax can be combined with the non-capturing parenthesized subexpression
syntax to limit the option scope to just that of the subexpression.  This is accomplished by specifying
options between the \(aq?\(aq and \(aq:\(aq characters.  For example, \(aq(?i:fu)bar\(aq would match
\(aqfu\(aq case insensitively and \(aqbar\(aq case sensitively.
.PP
The available options are:
.IP \fBA\fR 6
Enable or disable approximate matching features in the ERE pattern.  This option is equivalent to the
REG_APPROX compilation flag.
.IP \fBa\fR 6
Enable or disable alternate special handling of the newline character.  This option is equivalent to the
REG_ANY flag.
.IP \fBi\fR 6
Enabling this option causes case to be ignored during matching, while disabling it will restore case-sensitive
matching.  This option is equivalent to the REG_ICASE compilation flag.
.IP \fBn\fR 6
Enable or disable special handling of the newline character.  This option is equivalent to the REG_NEWLINE
compilation flag.
.IP \fBr\fR 6
Enable or disable right associativity in the ERE pattern.  This option is equivalent to the REG_RIGHTASSOC
compilation flag.
.IP \fBU\fR 6
Enabling this option will make ungreedy repetitions the default, while disabling it will make greedy
repetitions the default.  This option is equivalent to the REG_UNGREEDY (or REG_MINIMAL) compilation flag.
.PP
The scope of the option change begins immediately following the colon (if present) or right parenthesis
(otherwise), but only to the end of the enclosing subexpression, if any.  Thus, for example, given the ERE
\(aq(fu(?i)bar)baz\(aq, the \(aqfu\(aq portion matches case sensitively, \(aqbar\(aq matches case
insensitively, and \(aqbaz\(aq matches case sensitively again (since it is outside the scope of the
subexpression in which the inline option was specified).  Likewise, \(aqfu(?i:bar)baz\(aq will match in the
same manner, however a subexpression match will not be recorded in the \fIpmatch\fR array, as in the previous
example.
.SS Inline Comments
The syntax \(aq(?#\fIcomment\fR)\(aq can be used to embed comments within an ERE.  Note that \fIcomment\fR cannot
contain a right parenthesis.  Also note that while syntactically, option characters can be added before the
\(aq#\(aq character, they will be ignored.
.SH APPROXIMATE MATCHING
When the REG_APPROX flag is passed to the \fBxregcomp\fR() routine or one of its variants (see xregex(3)),
approximate matching features are activated.  These additional features are not compliant with the POSIX
standard, thus they should be used with care in situations which require portability.
.SS Definitions
Within a brace expression, approximate matching parameters may be specified.  The definition of a brace
expression is thus expanded to be \(aq{\(aq, possibly followed by a \fIbound\fR, possibly followed by
\(aq;\(aq and an \fIapproximation\fR \fIlimit\fR \fIexpression\fR, possibly followed by \(aq;\(aq and an
\fIapproximation\fR \fIcost\fR \fIexpression\fR, always followed by \(aq}\(aq.  At least one of the three
expressions must be specified between \(aq{\(aq and \(aq}\(aq.  If more than one is specified, they are
separated by \(aq;\(aq, and the latter two (approximation expressions) may be in either order.
.PP
An approximation limit expression is a sequence of one or more unique \fIlimits\fR.
.PP
A limit is one of \(aq+\(aq (maximum insertion count), \(aq-\(aq (maximum deletion count), \(aq#\(aq (maximum
substitution count), or \(aq~\(aq (maximum number of edits), possibly followed by an unsigned decimal integer.
If no integer is given, the corresponding count is infinite.
.PP
An approximation cost expression is an equation of form \(aq\fIn\fRi+\fIn\fRd+\fIn\fRs<=\fIc\fR\(aq, where
\fIn\fR and \fIc\fR are unsigned decimal integers representing cost values.  \(aq\fIn\fRi\(aq is the cost of
an insertion, \(aq\fIn\fRd\(aq is the cost of a deletion, \(aq\fIn\fRs\(aq is the cost of a substitution, and
\(aq<=\fIc\fR\(aq is the total cost.  A minimum of one term or the total cost must be specified; e.g.,
\(aq2s\(aq, \(aq1d<=2\(aq, and \(aq<=3\(aq are all valid.
.SS Matching Rules
The approximate matching parameters which are in effect during the matching process are determined using the
following rules:
.sp
.PD 0
.RS 2
.IP 1. 4
All limit and cost parameters are initially set such that all atoms in an ERE match exactly; that is, all limit
parameters are set to zero, all individual cost parameters are set to 1, and the maximum cost is set to zero.
.IP 2. 4
If any parameter is specified in either an approximation limit expression or approximation cost expression,
then the following rules apply to the associated atom:
.RS 6
.IP a. 4
If any individual edit or cost parameter was not set, it is set to 1.
.IP b. 4
If the "maximum number of edits" parameter \(aq~\(aq was not set, it is set to the maximum individual edit parameter.
.IP c. 4
If the "maximum cost" parameter \(aq<=\(aq was not set, it is set to infinity.
.RE
.RE
.PD
.PP
For example, the ERE \(aq(.*){+1#;2s+1i<=2}\(aq explicitly allows a maximum of one insertion (\(aq+1\(aq) and
an infinite number of substitutions (\(aq#\(aq) when attempting to match the subexpression against the string
to be matched.  It also specifies that the cost of a substitution is 2 (\(aq2s\(aq), the cost of an insertion
is 1 (\(aq1i\(aq), and the total edit cost cannot exceed 2 (\(aq<=2\(aq).  Because the maximum number of
deletions \(aq-\(aq was not specified, it is set to 1.  And since the total number of edits allowed \(aq~\(aq
was not specified, it is set to the maximum individual edit in effect, which is infinity.  Similarly, the cost
of a deletion \(aq\fIn\fRd\(aq was not explicitly set, so it is set to 1.  Lastly, because the total cost
\(aq<=\(aq was not specified, it is set to infinity.
.PP
Note that in order to disallow a certain type of edit, it must explicitly be set to zero; e.g., \(aq+0\(aq.  The
limit and cost parameters are used in combination to determine if the subexpression can be matched against the
string; see xregaex(3) for details.
.SS Notes
As explained in \fBDefinitions\fR above, approximate matching parameters are specified between braces \(aq{}\(aq
following an atom in the ERE, and apply only to that atom.  While the atom could be a single character (e.g.,
an ordinary character or a bracket expression), it is more common for the atom to be a subexpression enclosed
in parentheses \(aq()\(aq so that the approximate matching parameters may apply to multiple characters in the string
to be matched, and thereby allow for greater flexibility in the matching algorithm.
.PP
While it is possible to enclose an entire ERE in parentheses so that the parameters apply to the whole ERE, it
is usually easier in this instance to use the \fBxregaexec\fR() function instead and store the approximate
matching parameters in the \fBregaparams_t\fR structure that is passed to the function.  The idea here is to
use approximate matching parameters in the pattern only when it is desirable to have them apply to specific
portion(s) of it, not the pattern in its entirety.  However, both techniques may be used together to establish
a default level of approximation for the whole pattern (via \fBxregaexec\fR()) which then can be overridden by
approximate matching parameters specified in the pattern.
.PP
When performing approximate matching, the closeness of a match is measured in terms of the number of insert,
delete, and substitution operations necessary to convert the pattern into an exact match of the string to be
matched.  This number is called the edit distance between the string and the pattern (or Levenshtein
distance).  The edit distance is used with weighted costs for each operation to calculate the total cost of a
match.  Matches whose total costs are under a certain threshold are deemed to be successful.
.PP
The edit distance is subject to the limit parameters which are currently in effect; that is, the maximum
number of additions, deletions, and substitutions allowed, and the total number of edits allowed (which is the
sum of the first three parameters).  These limit values determine the degree of internal editing which can be
done to the portion of the pattern that the parameters are approximating in order to match it to the string.
Each type of edit that is done incurs a cost, and the total cost of all edits may not exceed the total cost
allowed.  If a certain edit or combination of edits is found whose cost does not exceed the total cost
allowed, the match is successful.  Note that the approximate matching algorithm will always choose the match
with the lowest cost if multiple matches are possible.
.SS Examples
Following are example brace expressions, illustrating how parameters are specified and their actual effect.
.IP "{~}" 18
Sets the maximum number of edits to unlimited.  However, the maximum number of insertions, deletions, and
substitutions would all be one by default; therefore, the maximum number of edits would actually be three.
.IP "{#2}" 18
Sets the maximum number of substitutions to two.  Hence, the maximum number of edits would also be two, and
the maximum number of insertions and deletions would each be one (the default).
.IP "{+2~5-0}" 18
Sets the maximum number of insertions to two, no deletions allowed, and the maximum number of edits to five.
The maximum number of substitutions would then default to one.
.IP "{#2;<=3}" 18
Sets the maximum number of substitutions to two, and the maximum cost to three.  However, the maximum number
of edits would be two also, so the maximum cost would effectively be two as well (because the costs of all
edits default to one).
.IP "{2i+1d+2s<=4;~}" 18
Sets the cost of an insertion to two, a deletion to one, a substitution to two, and the maximum cost to four.
Also, sets the maximum number of edits to unlimited; however, the actual maximum would be three because the
maximum individual edits default to one each.  Also, the number of edits is further constrained by the
weighted costs with a total cost of four, which would prevent, for example, one insertion, one deletion, and
one substitution (which adds up to five).
.SH SEE ALSO
xre(3), xregaex(3), xregex(3)
.sp
\fIRegular\fR \fIExpressions\fR IEEE Std 1003.1-2017, section 9
